

From: bcantin@aol.com (BCantin)
Newsgroups: rec.games.video.sega
Subject: Sega CD FAQ 1.0 (1/3)
Date: 13 Jun 1996 13:39:16 -0400

Sega CD FAQ 1.0
June 1996
Barry W. Cantin  (BCantin@aol.com)

Note: This document may be FREELY distributed in its original form. 
Nochanges or modifications are to be made without the author's permission.

Contents

O.   Introduction
I.   Description
II.  History
III. System Specs
IV.  The Sega CD line of machines
V.   Software
VI.  Conversion - US/Japanese/Europe
VII. Leftovers


O.  Introduction

Why?

This project began some months ago when I simply wanted to compile a
list of Sega CDs.  I got my Sega CD unit (the original one) as part of a
trade in May 1995 and very quickly began collecting the games.  They
have been heavily discounted nearly everywhere as places are rushing to
unload their Sega CD stock.  I've seen various titles sell for as low as
$2 apiece, new.

The collector bug bit me and I started to amass these things.  %^)  So I
decided to make a list to track my collection.  That list then grew to
include a few imports I acquired in a trade, then some info from
magazines looked good, then I dug up some old Japanese magazines for
info, and so on... before I knew it, I had enough information for a
bona-fide FAQ!  The information here is not exactly presented in FAQ form
- true, there
ARE a few FAQs inside this document - but it's more like a GUIDE.  My
object here is to answer the questions before they're asked.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions not
answered here, or ANY comments in general related to the Sega CD.  I
will be updating this FAQ/guide periodically, and I'm only too happy to
give credit where credit is due.  There are still several gaps here and
there, and I don't plan on version 1.0 of this FAQ being the last.

Speaking of credit, this FAQ would be a lot smaller without the valuable
contributions from the following individuals:

Clint Dyer (clint_dyer@prodigy.com)
   Clint's help has been unspeakably important in getting this done, and
for verifying a lot of the FAQ content.
Thien Tran (darkflt@cyberg8t.com)
   "Sonic" has supplied me with nearly 20k of text that has really added
   to the depth of the information in this FAQ.  He's put a LOT of time
   into compiling it all for the FAQ and it shows...
Steve Wargo (swargo@phoenixat.com)
   Steve has been maintaining a great Sega CD cheats list, get it from
   http://www.phoenixat.com/~swargo/
Nathan Stehle (stehle@aries.scs.uiuc.edu)
   Nathan has given Usenet readers great advance info on RPGs,
   particularly Working Designs titles (how do I get on that WD preview
   list anyway?)
Larry Brackney (zeiram@mail.hsonline.net)
   Larry's responsible, ultimately, for all this -- he traded his Sega
   CD to me and got me started!  [and a monster was created...]  %^)
Andy Wei Wu (no E-mail address... yet!)
   Wei is my video game "broker" (well more like a buyer's agent!) and
   source for much of this information
Vic Ireland and the rest of the Working Designs staff
   For bringing over those wonderful RPGs that made me want a SEGA CD in
   the first place
And to Bt Garner, Juan Gonzalez, Jon Folkers, and also the folks who
   frequent rgv.sega who still discuss the Sega CD... thanks!

Please address any comments, changes, additions, updates, yadda yadda
yadda, to me at BCantin@aol.com and I'll put your name in lights.  %^)


I.  Description

The Sega CD is an add-on peripheral for the Sega Genesis that allows the
use of CD-ROM games specially written for the Sega CD system.  It can
also be used as a regular CD player (the sound comes through the
television) and has CD+G capability.

The Genesis is connected to the Sega CD unit via the interface slot, and
a/v hookups are made through the Sega CD unit instead of the Genesis.
The advantage of this is that games can take advantage of the sound
provided directly by the compact disc in addition to sound effects from
the Genesis unit itself.

There are currently (as of 5/96) 147 Sega CD titles in the U.S.

The Sega CD was released first in Japan as the "Mega CD", and was also
released in Europe as the Mega CD.  Most Japanese and European games can
be played on the U.S. Sega CD unit via a converter cartridge (See
section VI) but without the cart, the Japanese and American systems are
not compatible.

Q: What does the Sega CD do to improve the system?

A: Here's what it adds to the Genesis:
   - 10 extra sound channels to complement the sound from the Genny's
     Z80 sound processor
   - sprite enhancement features such as scaling and rotation, similar
     to that of the SNES Mode 7
   What it did NOT improve was color.  The games still used 64 out of
   the total 512 colors possible (maybe more if you really knew how to
   tweak the system).  Why no color improvement?  Supposedly, cost.
   Sega's engineers reportedly wanted to include a new chip that would
   add to this, but it would have been an extra $5 part... which would
   more than likely translate to an extra $50 added to the cost of the
   machine.  Full sprite scaling and rotation were helpful, bringing new
   levels of excitement which weren't fully utilized (except perhaps in
   a few games from Core Development, Ltd.). The Sega CD also allowed
   the Genesis to play FMV ("full-motion video").  The FMV was
   originally about 1/4 screen (Sewer Shark) but later expanded to that
   of Tomcat Alley (FULL screen).

Advantages of CD games: better sound, much more information can be
stored on a CD than a cart (CD=650 MB, cart typically around 1 to 4 MB,
currently as high as 32 MB).  CDs also theoretically have an infinite
lifespan.

Disadvantages of CD games: loading time can be a pain, CDs scratch
easily.

Q: Are the Sega CD and Saturn compatible?

A: Not at all.  They are two COMPLETELY different machines.
   There were some rumors circulating back in '94/'95 that Sega would
   make an adapter that would allow you to play Sega CDs on a Saturn...
   but evidently due to cost constraints of developing and manufacturing
   such a "Power Base"-type converter, it was determined to be not
   feasible for sale in the retail market.

Q: Is the Sega 32X compatible with the Sega CD?

A: Yes.  When the 32X is mounted on top of the Genesis (attached to the
   Sega CD) there is absolutely NO interference to regular Sega CD
   games.  There were also six CD titles designed for use with the 32X
   (see Titles section) but all are just Sega CD titles ported over to
   take advantage of the 32X hardware.  The difference is a noticeably
   clearer, crisper FMV and generally a larger screen.  These titles
   were also sold in yellow-stripe boxes (Digital Pictures titles),
   consistent with 32X cartridge packaging.  "Fahrenheit" (Sega) was
   sold as a combo pack, you got both the Sega CD version and the
   32X CD version in one package.  NOTE:  All Sega 32X CD titles are
   FMV-based games.

Q: Is the Sega CD compatible with the TurboGrafx-CD/PC Engine
   CD/TurboDuo CD?

A: No, these are two entirely different game machines.  However,
   original Mega CD players COULD recognize a PC Engine CD (CD-ROM2),
   but could not play them.  A message appeared, informing you that a PC
   Engine CD was inserted in the unit.


II.  History

Development of the Sega CD was top secret.  Programmers did not know
what was being designed until the system was unveiled at the Tokyo Toy
Show in Japan.  Upon release, companies were told to start with "high
memory"-based cartridge games and work from there (add cinemas, CD-
music, FMV, etc., later).  The Sega CD was designed to take on the PC
Engine (TurboGrafx-16) CD unit, and NOT the SNES.  The key factor to the
Sega CD's design was that engineers based it somewhat on the PCE-CD, but
with MORE memory and a slightly faster drive (6 Mbits and 150k transfer
rate at 0.8 access time).

The original Mega-CD was released in Japan in (June 1991?), and was
developed to compete with NEC's PC Engine CD-ROM drive (equivalent to
the TurboGrafx-CD in the U.S.).  The machine was released with the
following titles in Japan:  Earnest Evans, Woodstock Funky Horror Rock
Band, ... etc.  The system was initially a hit in Japan, due to the CD
based RPGs (!) and the inherent advantages of CD-based titles (lots of
text, pics, animation, CD-based music, etc.).  Lunar: Silver Star was
one of these and helped sell the system during slow sales periods.

The Mega Drive (Genesis) is mounted to the Mega CD (Sega CD) unit
through the interface slot on the right side, and rested on top of it.
This is the front-loading model.  The drawer is opened by hitting the
<RESET> button, and closed by either hitting the pause button on
controller #1 or via the CD system software CLOSE command.

The Sega CD was released in November 1992 in the U.S. and looked very
much like the Japanese Mega CD counterpart.  Several pack-in titles were
included: the Sega Classics 4-in-1 CD (Shinobi, Columns, Streets of
Rage, and Golden Axe), Sherlock Holmes I, Sol Feace, and two CD+G/music
CD samplers.  The original selling price was $299.  (The second U.S.
production run after the initial 50,000 units had the Sega Classics
5-game CD instead of the four-game CD above - see CDX)

These were the Sega CD titles available at the time of launch:

   Cobra Command
   Night Trap
   Black Hole Assault
   Sewer Shark
   Chuck Rock
   INXS Make Your Own Music Video
   Marky Mark Make Your Own Music Video

Initial hype resulted in incredible sales.  There were 50,000 units
originally allotted in early November for the US launch.  ALL the units
were sold by the third week (prior to Thanksgiving).  The second run
began arriving in stores December 1992, approximately three days before
Christmas.

In (1994) Sega released a new, smaller Genesis and had a Sega CD II to
go with it.  This model connected to the Genny and sat (somewhat) side
by side with it.  Discs are loaded into the top of the unit, through a
manually-opened door.

Several third-party developers had signed on to do Sega, including Sony
Imagesoft, Vic Tokai, Konami, Data East, EA Sports, Psygnosis, Working
Designs, and many others.  All in all, 148 titles were produced for the
U.S. market.

The early Sega CD titles were packaged inside a cardboard box with the
instructions, and CD in a regular jewel case inside.  (Examples include
WonderDog, Jaguar, all the "Make My Video" titles except C+C Music
Factory)  In 1993, Sega of America began packaging them in large plastic
jewel cases, about 8-1/4" by 5-3/4" and about 3/4" thick.  These are the
same jewel cases used by Saturn games and some Playstation titles today.

Note that Sega of Japan continued to use regular-sized jewel cases for
all Mega CD games, with small instructions to fit inside, just like a
music CD.
   * Production runs for the Sega CD (original model) ended in 1993
   * Production runs for the Sega CD2 ended in December 1995, in order
     to increase the production of the Saturn

   * Total number produced: officially - ???
     - Unofficial estimate: 2.5 million, U.S., 2 - 3 million, Japan, 1
       million, Europe


III.  System Specs

The Sega CD adds graphics and sound capabilities to the standard Genesis
console.  Graphically, it provides superior scaling and rotation.  Most
of the sound for Sega CDs comes right off the disk, in addition to game
sound effects which can be provided by the Genesis.

System specs:

Main CPU: Motorola 68000 @ 12.5 MHz
   * Same as the Genesis... runs in parallel with it... except the Genny
     CPU runs at the slower clock speed 7.9 MHz

Graphics Processor: Custom ASIC

RAM:
   * 6 Mbit Main RAM
     - Program
     - Picture
   * 512 Kbit PCM Waveform Memory
     - Wavefile memory
   * 128 Kbit CD-ROM data cache memory
   * 64 Kbit Internal Backup RAM

Colors:
   * Originally 64, same as Genesis
   * Using programming tricks, can get 128 colors via HAM ("Hold and
     Modify")
     - Originally developed on the Commodore Amiga to boost color
       capabilities
     - Basically a graphic over a graphic = a double-color
   * Using Cinepak and TruVideo:
     - 128 to 256 colors
     - Increase screen size from 1/4 to full
     - Advanced compression scheme, used in Win 95
     - Software-based upgrade
   * Eternal Champions CD uses 256 colors simultaneously (only game to
     do so)

Storage capability of a Sega CD
   * Approximately 500 MB of data (62 min of audio data equivalent)
   * 1/4 screen B/W footage video: 1.5 to 4 hours
   * 1/4 screen color footage: 45 minutes
   * Above specs are prior to compression

Transfer rate of Sega CD: 150 kbytes/sec (Single Speed)

Boot ROM:
   * 1 Mbit, contains:
     - CD Game Bios
     - CD Player Software
     - CD+G Software

Bios versions:
   * When you start the Sega CD, the title screen displays the Bios
     version in the upper-right corner of the screen.  This helps
     identify what machine version you are using and in a way the
     security capabilities.  (Startup music and startup screen of the
     Sega CD is different for each Bios)

   Bios Version     Machine
       1.00         Original Mega CD
       1.10         Original Sega CD, Motorized Drive
       2.00         Mega CD2
       2.05         Sega CD2
       2.10         Sega CD2

CD Access time: 800 ms

Sound Circuitry:
   * PCM Sound Source
     - Stereo, 8 channels
   * 32 KHz Maximum sampling wavelength
   * 16 Bit D/A converter
   * 8X internal over-sampling digital filter

Audio characteristics:
   * Frequency Range: 20Hz - 20 KHz
   * Signal-to-Noise Ratio: >900dB@1K
   * Channel Separation: >900dB

Output: RCA Pin Jack x2 (L/R)

Dimensions: 301mm (w) x 212.5 (d) x 112.5 (h)

Weight (Sega CD1): 3.1 lbs / 1.4 kg


IV.  The Sega CD line of machines

The Sega CD exists in many forms.

     Sega CD I  (Mega CD I in Japan)
     Sega CD II (Mega CD II in Japan)
     JVC X'Eye  (Wondermega in Japan)
     Sega CDX   (Sega CDX in Japan)
     LaserActive (by Pioneer) Sega CD module

[Sega CD I]

The Sega CD I was the original unit.  It features a front-loading CD
tray and lights to indicate power to CD unit (green) and CD access
(red).  The Genesis attaches to it via the slot located on the right
side of the Genesis console..  This was the production run for Japan
(Mega CD) and the initial 50,000 units for the U.S market.  SCD 1.5 was
the second US production run, beginning after brisk sales of the first
run.

Since the original Genesis has a built-in audio output (with volume
control), the Sega CD requires this output as part of the connection.
Besides the interface connection on the side of the Genesis (which sits
on TOP of the Sega CD unit), an audio cable is used from the headphone
output of the Genesis to the "Mixing" input of the Sega CD.  This allows
you to change the volume of the Genesis while the Sega CD volume is kept
constant.

[Sega CD II]

The Sega CD II was released to match the newer-style Genesis II.  The
machine is 100% compatible with the first unit - i.e., all Sega CDs play
on both machines.  There are several differences between the newer model
and the first one: the never model has a top-loading tray, the power and
access lights are small red LEDs on the top of the unit, and the
construction seems to be less sturdy than the first model.  The
Sega CD II unit had several pack-in configurations, the most popular
being Sewer Shark.  Other pack-in configurations include:

SCD2b: Sonic CD
SCD2c: Sonic CD, Power Rangers, and Sewer Shark
SCD2d: Joe Montana Football (Sports Pack)
SCD2e: Tomcat Alley (Current and FINAL run)

Some older games like Lunar: The Silver Star and Dark Wizard
occasionally lock up on the Sega CD2.  It does have, however, slightly
shorter access times with games such as Lunar: Eternal Blue.

     Q:  Can I use my Sega CD II unit with my older-model Genesis?
     A:  Yes.  It attaches like the original model Genesis (I) to the CD
         Unit.  A special plastic extender plate adds on to the left
         side of SCD2 to hold the original Genesis.

     Q:  How about using a Sega CD I (older) unit with the newer model
         Genesis?
     A:  "Officially", no.  However, a special cable CAN be made to
         attach it as such.  It will not be as sturdy, and it's unsure
         how reliable this would be.  The hookups don't match for sound
         and you'll have to use the RF box unless you patch everything.
         Also, you cannot use the connector plate.

[JVC X'Eye]

The JVC X'Eye is an all-in-one unit, as it contains a Genesis-compatible
and a Sega CD-compatible in one housing. (3) The X'Eye includes the
pack-in titles "Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia" and "Prize Fighter",
both in cardboard sleeves.

In Japan, the X'Eye is known as the "Wondermega".  There were two
versions:

   * Original
     - Larger than the current model (Approx. size of SCD2 and SG2 in
       width)
     - Capable of handling oversized CDs (> 5"), which was the original
       concept behind CD movies in Japan... the format was NOT adopted
     - MIDI connection (music keyboard compatible)
     - Specialized MIDI/Keyboard development kit/program available in
       Japan ONLY.
   * Current version
     - Same as US X'Eye
     - Slimmer than Wondermega I
     - Lack extra features of the original

All Wondermegas were built by JVC Musical Industries of Japan.

[Sega CDX]

The Sega CDX is similar to the X'Eye in that it plays standard Genesis
carts as well as most Sega CDs.  Its advantage is the size -- about the
size of a portable CD player.  This unit is portable (there's even a
carrying case for it) but still requires a television or monitor to
play.  There were three CDs included as pack-ins: Sega Classics V
(Streets of Rage, Shinobi, Golden Axe, Columns, and Super Monaco GP),
Sonic CD, and Ecco the Dolphin CD.

There are a few Sega-CD titles that are not compatible with the CDX:

   Jurassic Park
   Radical Rex
   Terminator
   Who Shot Johnny Rock?

     Q:  Can I use my Sega CDX with the Sega Channel?
     A:  Yes - they are compatible.  Of course, only for cart-based
         games.

     Q:  Can I use a 32X add-on with my CDX?
     A:  Yes.  Although it's not officially endorsed by Sega, it *is*
         possible.  There may be a problem with spacing the 32X device
         over the unit, though.

[LaserActive]

The LaserActive system by Pioneer was a noble attempt at an all-in-one
unit.  It is essentially a Laser Disc player with available add-on
"modules" for Sega CD/Genesis and TurboGrafx-16/CD/PC Engine games.  The
machine also has its own library of 7 or 8 (?) LaserActive game titles.
The LaserActive was expensive ($800?) and each add-on module cost nearly
as much as the machine it was emulating ($200?), so cost was a
prohibitive factor in large volume sales of the unit.


V.  Software

This list of Sega CD titles was the very first part of the FAQ.  Once I
completed it I had amassed enough information for an entire FAQ, and it
just kept growing, and growing, and growing...

Numbers in parentheses () refer to notes at the bottom.

Guide to nomenclature:

   1st person shooter - a non-overhead, non-side-scrolling shooting game
      which takes place from the point of view of the player's
      ship/character/etc.  These games usually take advantage of the
      Sega CD's additional hardware and have much better effects than a
      comparable Genesis shooter.
   Action - arcade action, includes flying, and games with multiple
      elements (driving, shooting, platform, etc.)
   FMV - "Full Motion Video".  This is a type of game which uses
      digitized video or digitized animation for its graphics and
      gameplay is usually limited to pressing buttons at certain times.
      "Dragon's Lair" in the arcade is a very early (the first?) example
      of this, in which you had to time the main character's actions
      precisely, or else he was toast.
   Platform - Run and jump type of game, side-scrolling, in which the
      character can explore a landscape while running, jumping, and
      attacking with various types of weapons.  The word platform comes
      from early platform titles (e.g. Super Mario Brothers) in which
      the character actually jumped on various platforms.
   RPG - "Role Playing Game".  The first person RPGs refer to those
      games in which your view is a 3-D character's view of the dungeon,
      and you "see what your characters see".

There are 148 titles available in the U.S.

Name                                            Type
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Adventures of Batman and Robin              Driving
   (different from cart)
Afterburner 3                                   Action
AH-3 Thunderstrike                              Flying sim
Amazing Spiderman vs. Kingpin                   Action/Platform
Android Assault                                 Shooter
The Animals! (San Diego Zoo)                    Educational/Reference
AX-101                                          FMV Shooter (1st person)

B.C. Racers                                     Driving
Batman Returns                                  Action (driving)
Battlecorps                                     Shooter (1st person)
Bill Walsh College Football                     Sports
Black Hole Assault                              Fighting
Bouncers                                        Action/sports-like
Brutal - Paws of Fury                           Fighting

Cadillacs and Dinosaurs                         Driving/shooting
Championship Soccer '94                         Sports
Chuck Rock                                      Platform
Chuck Rock II - Son of Chuck                    Platform
Cliffhanger                                     Action/platform
Cobra Command                                   FMV shooter
Colors of Modern Rock (8)                       Music Video
Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia (4)          Educational/Reference
Corpse Killer                                   FMV shooter (6)
Crime Patrol                                    FMV shooter (uses gun,6)

Dark Wizard                                     RPG/strategy
Demolition Man                                  Platform
Double Switch                                   FMV action
Dracula                                         Action (minor FMV parts)
Dracula Unleashed (2CDs)                        FMV action
Dragon's Lair                                   FMV action
Dune                                            Action/platform
Dungeon Explorer                                RPG/arcade
Dungeon Master 2: Skullkeep                     RPG/1st person

Earthworm Jim CD (Special Edition)              Platform
Ecco the Dolphin CD                             Action/platform
Echo the Dolphin 2: The Tides of Time CD        Action/platform
ESPN Baseball Tonight                           Sports
ESPN National Hockey Night                      Sports
ESPN NBA Hangtime '95                           Sports
ESPN Sunday Night NFL                           Sports
Eternal Champions CD                            Fighting
Eye of the Beholder                             RPG/1st person

Fahrenheit (packaged with 32X version)          FMV action
Fatal Fury Special                              Fighting
FIFA Soccer                                     Sports
Final Fight                                     Fighting
Flashback CD                                    Platform
Flink                                           Platform
Formula 1 World Championship                    Driving
Frankenstein/Dracula (combo)                    FMV action/FMV action

Ground Zero Texas (2 CDs)                       FMV shooter

Heart of the Alien                              Platform
Heimdall                                        Puzzle/RPG
Hook                                            Platform

INXS: Make My Video                             FMV music
Iron Helix                                      action/puzzle/sci-fi

Jaguar XJ220                                    Driving
Jeopardy                                        Quiz
Joe Montana NFL Football                        Sports
Jurassic Park (5)                               Action/1st Person/Puzzle

Keio's Flying Squadron                          Shooter (side-scrolling)
Kids on Site                                    FMV educational
Kris Kross                                      FMV music

Lawnmower Man                                   1st person action/puzzle
Lethal Enforcers (with gun)                     Shooting (uses gun) (6)
Lethal Enforcers 2: Gunfighters                 Shooting (uses gun) (6)
Links: The Challenge of Golf                    Sports
Loadstar                                        FMV action
Lords of Thunder                                Shooter (side scrolling)
Lunar: The Silver Star                          RPG
Lunar: Eternal Blue                             RPG

Mad Dog McCree                                  Shooting (uses gun) (6)
Mad Dog McCree 2: Lost Gold                     Shooting (uses gun) (6)
Mansion of Hidden Souls                         Action/puzzle
Marky Mark                                      FMV music
Masked Rider (Kamen Rider ZO)                   FMV action
Mega Race                                       1st person action
Mickey Mania                                    Platform
Microcosm                                       1st person action
Midnight Raiders                                FMV action/shooter
Mighty Morphin Power Rangers                    FMV action
Mortal Kombat CD                                Fighting
My Paint                                        Educational

NBA Jam CD                                      Sports
NFL Trivia                                      Quiz/sports
NFL Greatest Teams                              Sports Trivia
NHL '94                                         Sports
Night Trap (2CDs) (see note (1) below)          FMV action
Nova Storm                                      1st person shooter

Panic!                                          puzzle/humor
Pitfall CD                                      Platform
Popful Mail                                     Platform/RPG
Power Factory                                   FMV music
Power Monger                                    Strategy/sim
Prince of Persia                                Platform
Prize Fighter (Video Boxing) (2 CDs)  (4)       FMV action
Puggsy                                          Platform

Racing Aces                                     Flying sim/action
Radical Rex (5)                                 Platform
RDF Global Conflict                             1st person shooter
Revenge of the Ninja                            Fighting
Revengers of Vengeance                          Fighting
Rise of the Dragon (See note 2 below)           Mystery
Road Avenger                                    FMV action
Road Rash                                       Driving
Robo Aleste                                     Shooter (side scrolling)

Samurai Shodown CD                              Fighting
Secret of Monkey Island                         Mystery/puzzle
Sega Classics 4-in-1 CD (1)                     Misc. arcade/puzzle
Sega CDX Classics 5-in-1 CD (3)                 Misc.
arcade/puzzle/driving
Sewer Shark (2)                                 FMV action
Shadow of the Beast II                          Platform
Sherlock Holmes (1)                             Mystery/puzzle
Sherlock Holmes II                              Mystery/puzzle
Shining Force CD                                RPG/strategy
Silpheed                                        1st person shooter
Slam City with Scottie Pippen (4 CDs)           FMV action
Snatcher                                        Mystery/gun (6)
Sol Feace (1)                                   Shooter (side-scrolling)
Sonic CD                                        Platform
Soulstar                                        1st person shooter
Space Ace                                       FMV action
Space Adventure                                 Mystery/Digital Comic Book
Starblade                                       1st person shooter
Star Wars Chess                                 strategy
Star Wars Rebel Assault                         FMV action
Stellar Fire                                    1st person shooter
Supreme Warrior (2 CDs)                         FMV action (fighting)
Surgical Strike (9)                             FMV action (shooter)

3 Ninjas/ Hook (2 CDs)                          Platform/platform
Terminator (5)                                  Platform
Third World War                                 Strategy/sim
Time Gal                                        FMV action
Tomcat Alley                                    FMV action
Trivial Pursuit                                 Quiz

Ultraverse Prime/Microcosm                      Platform/1st person
shooter

Vay                                             RPG

Wheel of Fortune                                Quiz
Who Shot Johnny Rock (5)                        Shooting (uses gun) (6)
Wild Woody                                      Platform
Willy Beamish                                   Action/adventure
Wing Commander                                  Action
Wirehead                                        FMV action
Wolfchild                                       Platform
Wonderdog                                       Platform
World Cup USA 94                                Sports
WWF Rage in the Cage                            Sports

32X versions of the following CDs were also released:

   Corpse Killer     (Digital Pictures)
   Fahrenheit (packaged with Sega CD version)  (Sega)
   Night Trap        (Digital Pictures)
   Slam City         (Digital Pictures)
   Supreme Warrior   (Digital Pictures)


Notes:
(1)    Sega CD 1 pack-in item.  Complete Pack-ins for Sega CD 1 (5 items):
          Sega Classics 4-in-1 CD (Shinobi, Streets of Rage, Columns,
             Golden Axe)
          Sherlock Holmes
          Sol Feace CD
          CD+G Sampler
          R&R Music sampler
(2)    Sega CD 2 Pack-in item.  (no box included, as well as smaller
       manual)
(3)    Sega CDX Pack-in item.  Contains Same four games as 4-in-1 plus
       Super Monaco GP.
(4)    JVC X'eye Pack-in item.  Compton's and Prize Fighter are in
       cardboard boxes/sleeves.
(5)    Does not work with Sega CDX system.
(6)    There were two types of light guns produced for Sega CD games.
       The first is the "Justifier", by Konami, which is included with
       Lethal Enforcers.  It can be used to play these titles: "Lethal
       Enforcers", "Lethal Enforcers 2", and "Snatcher".  The other
       light gun is by American Laser Games.  It isn't included with any
       of their Sega CD titles, but can be purchased separately.  A
       second gun (for player 2) was also made but is currently
       hard-to-find.  (Note: The Sega "Menacer" can also be used for
       these games, but unlike the American Laser Games guns, the
       Menacer requires batteries.)  These guns can be used with the
       following games:  "Crime Patrol", "Mad Dog McCree", "Mad Dog
       McCree II: The Lost Gold", and "Who Shot Johnny Rock".  Also,
       "Corpse Killer" (Digital Pictures) can be used with the Menacer.
(7)    All American Laser Games are FMV shooters
       All Digital Pictures games are FMV-based
(8)    "Colors of Modern Rock" is a promo-only CD by Sega and Digital
       Pictures.  It's a CD with six music videos produced in
       conjunction with Warner Custom Music.  You can play the videos as
       in a normal VCR tape.  The screen is approximately 1/3,
       combination of color and black-and-white.  It allows for play,
       stop, search, skip, freeze, and storage of 9 frames (based on
       available backup RAM space).  @1993 Sega, product code:
       WCM-9302-00 (in case anyone's interested).
       Featured bands (and song titles):
          Too Much Joy         Donna Everywhere
          T-Ride               Back Door Romeo
          The Belltower        Outshine the Sun
          Xtra Large           Hooker
          Mr. Big              To Be With You
          Dramarama            Haven't Got a Clue
(9)    Surgical Strike was never released for the 32X, despite the offer
       for an upgrade.  The original offer (noted on the cover of the
       instruction booklet as well) was to send Sega the card from the
       instruction booklet along with $3.75 for P&H, and Sega would send
       you an upgraded Surgical Strike CD for the 32X.  In early 1996,
       the 32X version was cancelled.  As of this writing (5/96) Sega
       has not decided what to do for the buyers of Surgical Strike who
       sent in the cards and money for the upgrade, but likely it will
       be an offer for another (possibly multiple) titles.

Here is a partial list of some Japanese titles (please send info on
others to BCantin@aol.com):

   A-Rank Thunder (RPG)
   Aisle Lord (RPG)
   AlShark (RPG/Adventure)
   Annet Again (Platform Fighting Adventure game - sequel to El Viento)
   Arcus 1 2 3
   Burai (RPG)
   Burning Fists (Fighting)
   Cosmic Fantasy Stories (RPG - Cosmic Fantasy parts 1/2)
   Cyborg 009
   Death Bringer (RPG)
   Detonator Organ (RPG)
   Devastator (Side scrolling shooter)
   Dynamic Country Golf (Sports)
   Earnest Evans
   F-1 Circus CD (racing)
   Fhey Area (RPG)  (note - also spelled "FAERIA" on other platforms)
   Funky Horror Band (RPG)
   Heavy Nova (fighter)
   Kelo Yugskitai
   Mega Schwarzchild (sim)
   Might & Magic 3 (RPG)
   Ninja Warriors (Action Arcade)
   Phantom City
   Power League Baseball (sports)
   Ranma 1/2 (anime puzzle?/fighting?)
   Side Story of Armageddon (RPG)
   Silky Lip (anime adventure/detective)
   Super League CD (Baseball)
   Tenkafubu (ancient Japan military strategy?)
   Tokyo Mah-Jongg (tile game)
   Wonder Mega Collection (WonderMega pack-in)

***equivalents to U.S. titles***

   Bari Arm = Android Assault
   Heavenly Symphony = Formula One: Beyond the Limit
   Ninja Haygate = Revenge of the Ninja
   Switch = Panic!
   ThunderStorm = Cobra Command
   Yumeni Mystery Mansion = Mansion of Hidden Souls


*** also released in U.S., same names ***
   Afterburner 3
   Black Hole Assault
   Final Fight CD
   Lunar
   Popful Mail
   Prince of Persia
   Shadow of the Beast 2
   Shining Force CD
   Silpheed
   Sol-Feace
   Sonic CD (music is different)
   Starblade
   Third World War

Here is a list of some European games, from a European game mag:

   Afterburner 3
   Another World  (AKA "Heart of the Alien")
   Batman
   BC Racers
   Black Hole Assault
   Cannon Fodder
   Chuck Rock
   Cobra Space Adventure
   Corpse Killer
   Cosmic Fantasy Stories
   Demolition Man
   Dracula Unleashed
   Dungeon Explorer
   Dungeon Master 2
   Earnest Evans
   Earthworm Jim
   Ecco the Dolphin
   Ecco 2
   Eternal Champions
   Eye of the Beholder
   Fahrenheit
   Fatal Fury Special
   FIFA Soccer
   Final Fight
   Heavy Nova
   Heimdall
   Jaguar XJ220
   Keio's Flying Machine
   Lethal Enforcers
   Lethal Enforcers 2
   Links Golf
   Lords of Thunder
   Marko's Magic Football
   Mega Race
   Midnight Raiders
   Myst
   Night Trap
   Nostalgia 1907
   Power Monger
   Power Rangers
   Prince of Persia
   Puggsy
   Road Avenger
   Samurai Shodown
   Sensible Soccer
   Sewer Shark
   Shining Force
   Silpheed
   Slam City
   Snatcher
   Sol-Feace
   Sonic CD
   Soul Star
   Starblade
   Supreme Warrior
   Surgical Strike
   Syndicate
   Theme Park
   Thunderhawk
   Thunderstorm-FX
   Time Gal
   Tomcat Alley
   Wolfchild
   Wonderdog
   World Cup Golf
   Yumeni Mystery Mansion (aka "Mansion of the Hidden Souls")

There were also some demo CDs that were occasionally included with UK
magazines, such as "Sega Pro" and "Mega Power".  These typically
included partial versions (demos!) of Sega CD games about to be
released.



Q:  I thought (GAME X) was released.  I've seen it listed for sale in
    various magazines.  What happened to it?

A:  This happens all the time.  A video game retailer (new or used, they
    all seem to do it) gets wind of a game under development, and
    they'll list it for sale - even if it hasn't been released yet.  Of
    course, when you call in to order it, it's not available - but will
    be as of [...some date, a few months in the future].  They devise
    their sale lists to reflect changes to accommodate new releases.
    What happens sometimes is that a title will be canceled before it's
    complete, yet it's still listed for sale all over the place.  This
    is not the developers' fault, but the fault of the video game
    retailers that include unreleased titles on their sale lists.
    Sometimes a game will be reviewed in a magazine, fooling some people
    into believing that it's been released.  In these cases, the
    reviewers nearly always get demo versions or early copies of games,
    that are occasionally canceled prior to release.  Meanwhile, there's
    a review of it out there somewhere, getting people ready for it.
    Sad, but true.  (Good example currently is "Penn & Teller's Smoke
    and Mirrors", which has probably been reviewed by every major gaming
    rag... yet at this time has not been released, nor does it appear
    that it will be).

Q:  What are some of those titles that have never been released, that
    will probably NEVER see the light of day?

A:  NOTE: SOme titles change before release also, which may account for
    this.  I'll be sure to let you know if I find any such examples.

    This list is naturally subject to change... but it doesn't look like
    it will.  I haven't gone through ALL the ads I've seen, these are a
    few of the more prevalent ones (I've seen ads for most of these, a
    few reviews too... and no, they're not out yet).  If I included all
    the unreleased titles from the many sale lists I've looked at from
    1993-present, there would probably be 30-40 more titles on it...
    Work has been done (in some cases to near-completion) on each of
    these titles below.

     UNRELEASED SEGA CD TITLES THAT WE THOUGHT WOULD BE (and still can!):
     -------------------------------------------------------------------
        Battle Frenzy (Core)  (WAS released as "Battlecorps")
        Braindead 13 (Readysoft)
        Citizen X (Digital Pictures)
        Clue
        Crime Patrol 2: Drug Wars (American Laser Games)
        Dai Bing
        Dark Seed (Vic Tokai)
        Dragon's Lair 2 (Readysoft)
        Exterminators (Sony Imagesoft)
        Flying Nightmares (Domark)
        Myst (Broderbund)
        No Escape (Sony Imagesoft)
        Penn & Teller's Smoke and Mirrors (Accolade)
        Power Drift
        Prince VVCR (Sega) ("Prince", as in "SymbolMan")
        Side Pocket (Data East)
        Space Pirates (American Laser Games)
        Young Indiana Jones (Sega)


VI.  Conversion

   Q:  Is it possible to play foreign CDs on my Sega CD/Mega CD?
   A:  Yes, but...

If you insert a foreign CD into your Sega CD (remember, there are three
nationalities of Sega CDs here: European, Japanese, and U.S.), you will
not be able to load it.  The reason for this is that a "nationality"
lockout code is on each Sega CD and Mega CD unit.  This assures (without
outside help) that a particular CD will only be playable on its
particular system.
   There is a way around this lock-out code.  There are cartridges
available that plug directly into the Genesis slot that allow foreign
CDs to be used by any system.

[The Lockout Chip]

The Sega CD unit had a specially designed BIOS chip/security program
that prevented the unit from reading CD games intended for other markets
(US, Japanese, European), such as Japanese or European CDs on a U.S.
machine, and vice-versa.  This Lockout chip or BIOS information
instructed the CD unit to read the CD and look for a certain
file/security identifier that indicated that the CD was authorized for
use on the system.

To work around this, the folks at Datel designed the Pro CD-X and
Pro CD-X Plus.

Pro CD-X (and Pro CD-X Plus)

This is a special cartridge that plugs into the Genesis in the cart slot
and overrides the security commands of the Sega CD.  This allows you to
play any Sega CD or Mega CD title on any Sega CD or Mega CD system of a
different origin.  However, it wasn't 100% effective - not all games
were compatible with this unit, making its appeal very limited.

During Sega's redesign of the Genesis and CD system, they improved the
Bios to prevent this cartridge from working.

CD+Plus

   This cartridge looks like a regular Genesis cartridge and has better
success with compatibility than its predecessors.  When the Sega CD is
powered up with this cart in place, it's possible to run the Sega CD via
the options screen (select "CD-ROM").  The reset button does NOT open
the Sega CD tray (first model), you have to do that via the options
screen as well.

CD+PLUS does not work with the 32X installed.

   Japanese CDs known to work successfully with CD+PLUS:
           AlShark
           Burai
           F-1 Circus CD
           Final Fight CD
           Heavenly Symphony
           Lunar
           Prince of Persia
           Sega Classics Arcade Collection (4-in-1)
           Silky Lip
           Silpheed
           Sol Feace
           Super League CD
           Tenkafubu
           Thunder Storm

   Known NOT to work with CD+PLUS:
           Black Hole Assault
           Heavy Nova

   Known NOT to work with Pro CD-X:
           Ranma 1/2

Secondary security lockout Bypass -
   This is the option to using one of the above carts.  It is possible
   to build your own switch onto the back of the Sega CD.  It requires
   rewiring two transistors, indicating US or Japan (no idea how
   European Sega CDs would work with this).  No details are available in
   this FAQ.


VII.  Sega CD Backup RAM Cart

This is an ordinary-looking Genesis cart which allows you to copy
individual files to and from the Sega CD internal RAM.  It allows 16
times the storage of the Sega CD's internal RAM.  One nice advantage is
that many games (particularly the memory-hogging RPGs) will allow you to
play directly from the backup RAM cart.

The cart allows you to copy individual files or the entire directory to
it from the RAM, and allows individual files to be copied over (space
permitting) to the Sega CD Internal RAM.

It behaves very much like a floppy disk, in that it must be formatted
before use, then files can be copied to/from it.  Individual files can
also be deleted.  Known shelf life is probably on the order of several
years, maybe longer.

The RAM cart has capacity for 1 Mbit of data storage (which translates
to 2000 blocks), or sixteen times the storage capacity of the internal
Sega CD RAM (125 blocks).

It is also required to perform certain things, such as access the third
"hidden" battle stages in Shining Force CD.  Since each Shining Force CD
saved game takes up almost all the internal Sega CD RAM and you have to
have saved games from both parts 1 and 2, you must have at least one of
them stored on the RAM cart.  Also, some games such as "Shining Force
CD", "Third World War", and "Eye of the Beholder" take up all 125 blocks
with a save game, so if you want to save anything else (or have multiple
saves) the backup RAM cart is essential.

One note: the External RAM cart instructions do not mention how long the
cart will keep the files but more than likely will keep them
approximately 3-5 years, assuming that the player occasionally plugs it
into the Sega Genesis WITH the Sega CD attached to recharge it and keep
power at optimum levels.  Later versions of the FAQ will have an index
of the savegame filenames.  This way, you will know what those "mystery
files" are that have been there for a long time...

The RAM cart retails for $59.99, although they have been on sale at Toys
R Us for $29.99.  Highly recommended for RPGs. (No, I don't work for Toys
R Us...)


VIII.  Miscellaneous Frequently Asked Questions

Q:  Do any Sega CD titles use the "Mega Mouse"?

A:  Yes, they are:
       Eye of the Beholder
       Mansion of the Hidden Souls
       My Paint
    These titles are MUCH easier to use with the Mega Mouse instead of
    a standard joypad.

Q:  Is there an emulator that will let me play Sega CDs on my Mac/PC?

A:  No.  There has been extensive discussion on the Internet over such
    an emulator but no evidence of one has been brought forward.  It has
    been rumored that such an emulator did exist for the Macintosh since
    the Genesis and Mac are both 68000-based machines, and that the
    "emulator" was based on the development kit used by programmers to
    make Sega CD-based games.  With the appearance of NES, ColecoVision,
    and other game system emulators within the last couple years,
    chances are that a Sega CD emulator for Mac/PC/Unix might appear
    someday.

Q:  Is there a Game Genie for the Sega CD system?

A:  No.  There never was a "game enhancing" device for the Sega CD.
    Neither Galoob nor Datel ever brought one on the market.  At one
    point in time, approximately mid-1993 when the Sega CD was in its
    heyday, Galoob announced that they were working on a Game Genie for
    the Sega CD.  Based on comments from Galoob officials, the device
    would fit between the Genesis and the Sega CD.  However, due to
    market conditions (i.e. the system wasn't a booming success) and the
    inherent change invoked by Sega from the original Sega CD style to
    the newer Sega CD2 style made it not feasible for Galoob to develop
    such a device and thus it was shelved.  Reasons for this being, the
    change in system design by Sega made it harder for Galoob to make a
    "universal" style adapter that would work with both units (Sega CD 1
    and CD2) along with relatively few games and wavering public 
    support.  (Side note: on review of the design of the original and
    newer Genesis and Sega CD systems, it is theoretically possible to
    have made it work.  It might have looked a little weird, but it was
    possible.)

Q:  What is the advantage of a CD title over the equivalent cart title
    (Example: Pitfall)?

A:  The CD version usually has better music (and more of it) since it
    comes directly from the CD.  Ecco the Dolphin is a good example of
    this.  In some titles, as in the case with Pitfall CD and Earthworm
    Jim CD, extra levels, sports teams, etc. are included.  Some titles
    also have FMV cinemas between levels.  Also, in some cases (such as
    Jurassic Park) it's an entirely different game.

Q:  Where can I find a list of cheats for Sega CD games?

A:  There are two places on the net you can look.  First, try the Sega
    Sages' page:
       http://www.nebula.net/sega
    This site is a veritable encyclopedia of gaming info, from the NES
    to the Saturn.  There's a great section in there on the Sega CD, too.

    Also, Steve Wargo has a cheats list that is as complete as any I've
    seen (also includes some strategies).  Check here:

        http://www.phoenixat.com/~swargo/         - OR -
        http://athos.phoenixat.com:80/~swargo

    Steve's database has been very well kept-up and includes hints as
    well as codes.

    Off the net, you can look for a book called "Sega CD Official Game
    Secrets", by Rusel DeMaria and Tom Stratton Jr.  (Prima Publishing,
    1994).  It's got EXCELLENT tips and walkthroughs on 27 Sega CD
    titles, including a few cheats here and there.  Very highly
    recommended for the library if you collect Sega CDs.

    The magazine "Tips and Tricks" also keeps a list of Sega CD cheats
    and Easter eggs.

Q:  Are there any other sources on the Internet for Sega CD information?

A:  The Usenet newsgroup rec.games.video.sega is a good place to look.
    Another newsgroup to check, although it's less busy, is
    alt.sega.genesis.  Generally, if you have a Sega CD-related
    question, post it there and someone will probably post an answer.
    Unfortunately, the Sega of America webpage:
       http://www.segaoa.com
    no longer carries information about the Sega CD system or its games.

Q:  What is "QSound"?

A:  From the Sonic CD manual: "QSound Virtual Audio is a revolutionary,
    multi-dimensional sound placement technology.  If your Sega CD is
    connected to stereo sound, you can submerge yourself in the magic of
    state-of-the-art QSound.  This amazing sound technology gives you
    180 degrees of audio in a greatly expanded sound field.  You'll be
    surrounded in waved of 3-D sound!"  Sega CD titles which utilize
    QSound include:

       Spiderman vs. Kingpin
       Sonic CD

Q:  What are the RPGs available for the Sega CD?

A:  First, there's the Working Designs games:
       Dark Wizard (hex-grid battle-sim RPG)
       Lunar: The Silver Star  (most popular)
       Lunar: Eternal Blue
       Popful Mail (more of a platformer but lots of RPG-type elements
          to it)
       Shining Force CD (completely different stories from the cart-
          based games, and the stories here are VERY linear (ie no town
          exploration, just battle after battle)
       Vay (very good)

    There are a few others, which are ports from computer games:
       Eye of the Beholder
       Dungeon Master II
       Heimdall (more like a puzzle game)
    And then the misc. RPG-like category
       Dungeon Explorer II  (a Gauntlet clone, it's based on the Dungeon
          Explorer games for the TurboGrafx-16/Duo/PC Engine, although
          it's different from those two titles)

NOTE: There are more available for the Mega-CD (Japanese) and generally
   require the player to read Japanese in order to play them.  See the
   List (Section V) above for specific titles.

Miscellaneous tidbits...

   * Majority of Sega CD/CD2 design based on JVC CD technology
   * All original Sega CD game CD-ROMs were pressed by JVC for Sega
   * Many games can be reset with the joypad by simultaneously pressing
     A,B,C, then <start>
   * Mega CD (Japanese) version of Sonic CD has different music than the
     US version and features a rap-based intro (!)
   * The most popular renter of Sega CD units and games was Blockbuster
     Video.  They were discontinued from most stores 1995-1996.



